Alaska and Bark Beetles 
Over the twentieth century, global temperatures increased by an average of about 0.7 degrees Celsius, but some places 
have warmed a lot more than this, and other places have warmed less. These temperature increases have been enough to 
trigger changes in ecosystems all over the world, especially in places where the warming has been the greatest. In some 
places, the changes have been subtle, perhaps a slight shift in vegetation that only a careful observer would notice. In other 
cases, small changes in climate have sparked a chain of larger effects, leading to massive changes. 
The biggest climate-caused ecosystem shifts today are happening at the world's most northern latitudes, where the 
temperature over the last century has been rising about two times faster than the global average. In the northernmost state 
of the United States, Alaska, for example, warming has paved the way for a spike in the numbers of spruce bark beetles. 
Bark beetles have been a pest to Alaskan white spruce trees for thousands of years, but their numbers were held in check by 
the cold climate, which forced the insects to hide in the bark of individual trees for most of the year. As the length of the
warm season increased over the 1980s and 1990s, however, bark beetles had more time to fly from one tree to the next, 
burrow, and lay their eggs between the bark and the wood. The beetles had another thing going for them, too: a multi-year 
drought had weakened many of the spruce trees, leaving them vulnerable to attack.
In the mid-1990s, the bark beetle population exploded, and over the next few years the pests wiped out white spruce forests 
over an area the size of the U.S. state of Connecticut. In the years since, the combined forces of a longer insect-breeding 
season and forest management practices that left forests overcrowded gave way to similar epidemics farther south. Large 
swaths of pine and spruce have been destroyed by insects in several other parts of the United States. In the late 1990s, the 
effects of the bark beetle epidemic rippled throughout Alaska's white spruce ecosystem and affected virtually every 
population of living organisms, but not all of the impacts were negative. Fewer spruce trees meant a sunnier area in the 
forest below the treetops, which allowed grasses to move in and take hold. The grasses, in turn, changed the soil temperature, 
making the environment more friendly for some other types of vegetation. Animals that feed on grasses, including moose, 
elk, and some birds, also benefited. But the beetle infestation was bad news for organisms that rely on white spruce for their 
habitat, like hawks, owls, red squirrels, and voles. Volesa type of small, mouselike rodentare an especially vital part of the 
ecosystem because they help spread mycorrhizal fungi, which attach to the roots of plants and help them take in water and 
nutrients. Voles are also an important food for a number of predators. 
Ecosystem changes always hurt some living creatures and help others. It's hard to say, therefore, whether a change is good 
or bad overall. Instead, ecologists (people who study ecosystems) often focus on the impacts on a single species: for instance, 
us. In the short term, the Alaskan spruce beetle epidemic supplied a lot of people with firewood, but only by destroying tons 
of otherwise valuable timber and threatening the livelihoods of loggers. And no one knows for sure what the long-term 
impacts on the forest will be. Ecosystems tend to return to their previous states after disturbances like pest outbreaks, fires, 
or major storm events, but if the Alaskan spruce ecosystem is disturbed too often or too much, it might shift to a different 
type of forest, a woodland, or a grassland instead. 
In extreme cases, major assaults on ecosystems can lead to a total collapse in which the ecosystem doesn't bounce back to 
the way it was or transition to a new, healthy state. The result is an area with very little life; in the oceans, biologists refer 
to these areas as dead zones. One such example is the coral reef die-off that happened in the Indian Ocean in the late 1990s.