Animal Behavior 
By the early 1900s the field of animal behavior had split into two major branches. One branch, ethology, developed 
primarily in Europe. To ethologists, what is striking about animal behaviors in that they are fixed and seemingly 
unchangeable? For example, kittens and puppies play in characteristic but different ways. Present a kitten with a ball of yarn 
and invariably it draws back its head and bats the yarn with claws extended. Kittens are generally silent as they play, and 
their tails twitch. Puppies, by contrast, are most likely to pounce flat-footed on a ball of yarn. They bit and bark and their 
tails wag. Ethologists came to believe that ultimately even the most complex animal behaviors could be broken down into 
a series of unchangeable stimulus/response reactions. They became convinced that the details of these patterns were as 
distinctive of a particular group of animals as were anatomical characteristics. For well over half a century, their search for 
and description of innate patterns of animal behavior continued. 
Meanwhile, mainly in North America, the study of animal behavior took a different tack, developing into comparative 
behavior. Of interest to comparative behaviorists was where a particular came from, that is, its evolutionary history, how 
the nervous system controlled it, and the extent to which it could be modified. In 1894, C. Lloyd Morgan, an early 
comparative behaviorist, insisted that animal behavior be explained as simply as possible without reference to emotions or 
motivations since these could not be observed or measured. In Morgan’s research, animals were put in simple situations, 
presented with an easily described stimulus, and their resultant behavior described. 
The extension to animals of behaviorism—the idea that the study of behavior should be restricted to only those elements 
that can be directly observed—was an important development in comparative behavior. Studies of stimulus/response and 
the importance of simple rewards to enforce and modify animal behavior were stressed. Not surprisingly, comparative 
behaviorists worked most comfortably in the laboratory. Comparative behaviorists stressed the idea that animal behavior 
could be modified, while their ethologist colleagues thought it was innate and unchangeable. Inevitably, the two approaches 
led to major disagreements. 
To early ethologists, the major driving force in behavior was instinct, behaviors that are inherited and unchangeable. Moths 
move towards light because they inherit the mechanism to so respond to light. Although dogs have more options available 
to them, they bark at strangers for much the same reasons. The comparative behaviorists disagreed: learning and rewards 
are more important factors than instinct in animal behavior. Geese are not born with the ability to retrieve lost eggs when 
they roll out the nest, they learn to do so. If their behavior seems sometimes silly to humans because it fails to take new 
conditions into account, that is because the animal’s ability to learn is limited. There were too many examples of behaviors 
modified by experience for comparative behaviorists to put their faith in instincts. 
The arguments came to a peak in the 1950s and became known as the nature or nurture controversy. Consider how 
differently an ethologist and a comparative behaviorist would interpret the begging behavior of a hatchling bird. The first 
time a hatchling bird is approached by its parent, it begs for food. All baby birds of a particular species beg in exactly the 
same way. Obviously, said the ethologists, they inherited the ability and the tendency to beg. Baby birds did not have to 
learn the behavior, they were born with it—a clear example of innate, unchanging behavior. Not so, countered the 
comparative behaviorists. Parent birds teach their young to beg by stuffing food in their open mouths. Later experiments 
showed that before hatching, birds make and respond to noises of their nest mates and adults. Is it not possible that young 
birds could learn to beg prenatally?
It was hard for ethologists to accept that innate behaviors could be modified by learning. It was equally difficult for 
comparative behaviorists to accept that genetic factors could dominate learning experiences. The controversy raged for over 
a decade. Eventually, however, the distinctions between the two fields narrowed. The current view is that both natural 
endowments and environmental factors work together to shape behavior